KEP 5419: Add instrumentation section and update GA criteria (#6184)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5419-pod-level-resources-in-place-resize/README.md

Reviewer: Another recent one to add:

- **`kubectl describe node` shows `0` for pod-level resource pods (v1.34, v1.35)**:
  - Detection: `kubectl describe node` reports `0 (0%)` CPU/memory for pods that set resources only at pod level (`spec.resources`), not at container level.
    Ref: [kubernetes/kubectl#1807](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/1807) and [kubernetes/kubernetes#137158](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/137158).
  - Mitigations: Upgrade kubectl to version >= v1.36 where the fix has landed.
    Ref: [kubernetes/kubernetes#137394](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/137394)
  - Diagnostics: Check `kubectl get pod <name> -o jsonpath='{.spec.resources}'` to verify the actual values stored in etcd.

Author: Done

Reviewer: could you please update the list of e2e and unit tests that were added during alpha/beta graduations for documentation and future reference purposes?

Author: Done

Reviewer 2: This part deserves an update as well.

Author: Done

Reviewer 2: What about these tests? Seems like they cover several important areas of the functionality, are they implemented?

Author: Updated, 2 tests are not implemented. It is easy to implement the OOMKill related scenario. I need to vet if the cpu throttling scenario is possible to implement or not.

implemented, will in a small way reduce the effort for both of those KEPs by
providing a single place to update the pod resource calculation.

### Instrumentation

The Kubelet will record the following metrics. These are categorized by whether they are new additions for Pod-level resources or existing metrics (from KEP-1287) that have been extended.

#### New Metrics (Pod-Level Specific)

These metrics are introduced to provide dedicated observability into Pod-level resize intent and state.

* **`kubelet_pod_requested_resizes_total`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the total number of Pod-level resize attempts observed by the Kubelet.

>   * *Labels:* `container_resize`, `pod_level_resize`, `resource`, `requirement`, `operation`, `namespace`.

Reviewer 3: Similarly, I don't think the container_resize and pod_level_resize labels should be added here. 

It's worth adding a description of what this metric tracks. If this metric is analogous to kubelet_container_request_resizes_total, then it means for example that a single resize request that changes all mem and cpu requests & limits will be recorded 4 times as each change is recorded separately. It would be good to include this detail in the KEP.

* **`kubelet_pod_pending_resizes`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the current count of pods that the Kubelet marks as pending.
  * *Labels:* `reason`, `reason_detail`, `namespace`, `container_resize`, `pod_level_resize`.

* **`kubelet_pod_in_progress_resizes`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the total count of resize requests that the Kubelet marks as in progress.
  * *Labels:* `namespace`, `container_resize`, `pod_level_resize`.

* **`kubelet_pod_deferred_resize_accepted_total`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the total number of resize requests that the Kubelet originally marked as deferred but later accepted.

>   * *Labels:* `accepted_reason`, `namespace`, `container_resize`, `pod_level_resize`.

Reviewer 3: These metrics are included in KEP-1287. Did you mean to have them in the below section?

#### Extended Metrics (From KEP-1287)

These metrics are inherited from KEP-1287 and have been enhanced with new labels to capture the interaction between container-level and pod-level resizes.

* **`kubelet_container_requested_resizes_total`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the total number of container-level resize attempts.

>   * *Labels (Enhanced):* Includes original labels (`resource`, `requirement`, `operation`, `namespace`) plus new `container_resize` and `pod_level_resize` boolean labels.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this should have container_resize and pod_level_resize labels. This metric is specific to container resize requests.

* **`kubelet_pod_resize_duration_seconds`**
  * *Description:* Tracks the duration of `doPodResizeAction` for actuating resizes.

>   * *Labels (Enhanced):* Includes original labels (`namespace`) plus new `container_resize` and `pod_level_resize` boolean labels.

Reviewer 3: It looks like you are looking at the description of the metrics from KEP 1287. In implementation we made a couple of changes, including removing the `namespace` label from all metrics, changing this metric to milliseconds, and adding a success label. I would reference the official metrics documentation rather than KEP 1287 which is slightly outdated.

#### Standardized Boolean Labels

To ensure orthogonality across all metrics, the following boolean labels are now applied to **both new and extended** metrics:

* **`container_resize`**: `true` | `false`

> * **`pod_level_resize`**: `true` | `false`

Reviewer 3: nit / bikeshedding

maybe better names are `container_resources` and `pod_resources` ?

then for mem-backed volumes I could add another one something like `memory_volumes`

cc @tallclair for opinions

  * - [Pod Level Resources Resize](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/e2e/common/node/pod_level_resources_resize.go): [SIG Node](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-presubmits#pr-kubelet-e2e-podlevelresources-resize), [triage search](https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html?ci=0&pr=1&sig=node&job=pr-kubelet-e2e-podlevelresources-resize)

> The following e2e scenarios were implemented and verified during Alpha and Beta:

Reviewer 3: Do we have an e2e test that covers shrinking pod-level memory limits below usage?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer 3: for container-resize, we also have some tests covering resource quota, prioritized resizes, limitRanger, and complex interaction between multiple `Deferred` resizes.

these tests live here: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/e2e/node/pod_resize.go

it may be worth evaluating of any of them would benefit from including coverage for PLR resize

  for Pod-level resource resize.

> * Revisit the decision of which component sets the defaults for PodStatus.Resources.

Reviewer: > Revisit the decision of which component sets the defaults for PodStatus.Resources.

Could you clarify this decision before GA?

There is also a open TODO as well [in the code](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5f3b845f8f5a361455ff47adbe8b11d0de471cad/pkg/kubelet/kubelet_pods.go#L2201-L2204) and [above in KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6184/changes#diff-f329850177ce55e0ef3ed66fac40885c7dba8466c4774b1c4bdc35b85332154eL426)

Author: Done

Reviewer: @ndixita, i think the recent changes for addressing the review are not synced in the PR. PTAL

Author: sorry, pushing the changes now

Author: Done

#### GA (stable) [DONE]

> * VPA Integration of In-Place Resize moved to beta.

Reviewer: Is this work tracked as part of [AEP-7571](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/pull/8586) or some other AEP?

Confirming since the AEP-7571 is not merged (and IIUC not code implemented as well yet?)

Author: This is being removed as a GA blocker. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nbUNuuW3YbKkea124nyBrUjw97TS3i1d019S8YxsFYA/edit?usp=sharing We discussed the plan with VPA folks and it has been agreed upon to remove this as a GA blocker as:

- VPA is out-of-tree and has a separate release cycle unlike in-tree HPA 
- VPA doesn’t break if pod-level resources exist. It could invalidate the pod if container requests/limits don’t comply with the pod-level resources requests and limits rules.

Reviewer: please update to reflect it in the KEP as well (to strike it from GA criteria with a link to same doc) for documentation purposes please? !

Author: Done

> * No major bugs reported for 3 months.

Reviewer: Following k/k bugs are still open:

- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/139627   (listed as [blocker for GA](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/139627#issuecomment-4674977843))

- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/135082
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/137628
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/138473

Author: These bugs are related to pod-level resources KEP-2837 which we plan to resolve in the development cycle

Reviewer: @ndixita, 

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/139627 is marked as GA blocker by  @SergeyKanzhelev 

could you please confirm on this one.

Although, one thing (just for understanding sake) - how much of the above bug in the pod level
resources/status fields will affect the "in place resize" logic?

@ndixita - can we get a SIG review/approval as well on this? Thanks

Author: Sorry, and yes it is a GA blocker. Let me add these to the list of GA work items then, and these are all small bugs.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/139627 makes me very uncomfortable approving the PRR knowing we have a rather recent blocker and I don't see any WIP PR attempting to fix it. I'd love to hear from @SergeyKanzhelev before I will approve this.

Reviewer 4: I am ok to fix the bug during development and I feel like this can be well tested. But the graduation criteria needs to be reworded.

That's said my bigger concern is lack of production usage reports - we just adding metrics and seeing first bug reports from testing. It will be great to find more real world usage examples.

* Extend instrumentation from
  [KEP#1287](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/ef7e11d088086afd84d26c9249a4ca480df2d05a/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources/README.md)
  for Pod-level resource resize.
* Decision finalized: `PodStatus.Resources` defaults are set by the Kubelet, not the API server, to ensure accuracy based on node-level admission and allocation. [DONE]

#### GA (stable)

* No major bugs reported for 3 months.

> * UpdatePodSandboxResources is implemented by containerd & CRI-O

Reviewer 2: I see this is done:
- https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Acontainerd%2Fcontainerd%20UpdatePodSandboxResources&type=code
- https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Acri-o%2Fcri-o%20UpdatePodSandboxResources&type=code

* Extend instrumentation from
  [KEP#1287](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/ef7e11d088086afd84d26c9249a4ca480df2d05a/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources/README.md)
  for Pod-level resource resize.
* Revisit the decision of which component sets the defaults for PodStatus.Resources.
* Decision finalized: `PodStatus.Resources` defaults are set by the Kubelet, not the API server, to ensure accuracy based on node-level admission and allocation. [DONE]

#### GA (stable)

> * VPA Integration of In-Place Resize moved to beta.

Reviewer 5: sig-autoscaling lead here: this is fine, I don't see VPA as a blocked (and it shouldn't have been added here in the first place)

Author: cc: @soltysh

* If the Kubelet supports InPlacePodLevelResourcesVerticalScaling, it will always
  set the Resources field in Pod status.

> * The `PodResizePending` and `PodResizeInProgress` pod conditions should be false, indicating the resize has completed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `PodResizePending` and `PodResizeInProgress` pod conditions should be cleared, indicating the resize has completed.
```

Author: Reverted. PTAL

The metrics inherited from KEP-1287 will be enhanced with a `target_type` label to account for the atomic nature of Pod-level resource updates. This instrumentation strategy shifts from a simple binary scope to an encompassing one that captures unified transactions.

`target_type` values:
- `container`: Only container resources are changing.
- `pod`: Only pod-level resources are changing.
- `mixed`: Both container-level and pod-level resources are changing in the same request.

**Why this is better than a binary "either/or" scope:**
- **Atomicity Visibility:** Because the KEP treats the entire request as an atomic operation, using a `mixed` value allows operators to see the aggregate success rate of complex, combined resize requests.
- **Lower Cardinality:** We are not adding redundant metrics; we are simply adding a dimension to existing ones. This keeps monitoring overhead low and dashboards clean.
- **Troubleshooting Path:** If a spike in infeasible resizes occurs, an operator can immediately filter by `target_type=mixed` to see if the contention is specifically caused by the interaction between pod-level and container-level resource requirements.

> ### Dependencies

Reviewer: There's a [dependency](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/features/kube_features.go#L2371) on the `NodeDeclaredFeatures` feature gate.

If `NodeDeclaredFeatures` is disabled, all three components (apiserver, scheduler, kubelet) will fail to start.

please update this section to call this out.

Reviewer 2: This is in-cluster, or even specifically in-process dependency, which will fail during startup. If you try to enable a FG which depends on a different one we will fail starting the component. This question is strictly to describe dependencies on external services. An example would be CRI or metrics server, etc. So @ndixita you can ignore the above comment for PRR.

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

> The metrics inherited from KEP-1287 will be enhanced with a `target_type` label to account for the atomic nature of Pod-level resource updates. This instrumentation strategy shifts from a simple binary scope to an encompassing one that captures unified transactions.

Reviewer 3: Can you list the exact metrics that this applies to? For example, I don't know whether this strategy makes sense for `kubelet_container_requested_resizes_total`; I imagine we likely want to introduce a new metric `kubelet_pod_requested_resizes_total` rather than enhancing `kubelet_container_requested_resizes_total` ?

`target_type` values:
- `container`: Only container resources are changing.
- `pod`: Only pod-level resources are changing.

> - `mixed`: Both container-level and pod-level resources are changing in the same request.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if this is the right model. If an operator wants an alert on any request that involves pod-level resize, they would have to query both `pod` and `mixed`. 

An alternative labelling strategy would be to have two separate labels:

- `container_resize`: true/false
- `pod_level_resize`: true/false

If mixed, set both to true.

I feel this alternative is a bit cleaner but I can see merits to both. It might be good to get feedback from sig instrumentation here.

Reviewer 3: Another reason I am in favor of this alternative is that it is more extensible. I'd like to extend the existing resize metrics for [memory-backed volumes resize](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/139425), and the alternative would allow me to add a third label `mem_backed_volume_resize` without ambiguity about what "mixed" means.

Author: Cleaned the section and incorporated your feedback. PTAL

**Why this is better than a binary "either/or" scope:**
- **Atomicity Visibility:** Because the KEP treats the entire request as an atomic operation, using a `mixed` value allows operators to see the aggregate success rate of complex, combined resize requests.
- **Lower Cardinality:** We are not adding redundant metrics; we are simply adding a dimension to existing ones. This keeps monitoring overhead low and dashboards clean.

> - **Troubleshooting Path:** If a spike in infeasible resizes occurs, an operator can immediately filter by `target_type=mixed` to see if the contention is specifically caused by the interaction between pod-level and container-level resource requirements.

Reviewer 3: I don't quite follow this reasoning. The feasibility checks don't really have anything to do with interaction with pod and container level resources ?

Author: Reverted

- **CRI Runtime doesn't support Pod Sandbox Resize**:
  - Detection: `PodStatus.Resize` will be stuck in `InProgress` and Kubelet logs will
    show errors calling `UpdatePodSandboxResources`. Additionally, `kubelet_pod_in_progress_resizes` will remain elevated for the affected pods, and `kubelet_pod_resize_duration_seconds` may show high latency or timeouts.
  - Mitigations: Disable the feature gate or upgrade the container runtime to a
    compatible version (e.g., latest containerd/CRI-O).
  - Diagnostics: Kubelet logs (search for `UpdatePodSandboxResources` errors) and

>     `kubectl get pod <name> -o yaml` to check `resizeStatus`.

Reviewer: `PodStatus.Resize` (or `ResizeStatus`) field is now [deprecated](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1b85ff009e30bd1f42c320697a0548f5591e6e6c/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L5440)
 
> Deprecated: Resize status is moved to two pod conditions `PodResizePending` and `PodResizeInProgress`

Could you update all references to use the new recommended pod status conditions?

another reference that needs similar updating - https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6184/changes#diff-f329850177ce55e0ef3ed66fac40885c7dba8466c4774b1c4bdc35b85332154eL737

Author: Fixed, PTAL

-->

- **CRI Runtime doesn't support Pod Sandbox Resize**:
  - Detection: `PodResizeInProgress` condition will be stuck in `True` and Kubelet logs will

>     show errors calling `UpdatePodSandboxResources`. Additionally, `kubelet_pod_in_progress_resizes` will remain elevated for the affected pods, and `kubelet_pod_resize_duration_seconds` may show high latency or timeouts.

Reviewer 3: > `kubelet_pod_resize_duration_seconds` may show high latency or timeouts

`kubelet_pod_resize_duration_seconds` tracks the latency of [doPodResizeAction](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e7c90e9b46be42a1980342991c3c87ae626c69e4/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime/kuberuntime_manager.go#L820). If the runtime blocks calls to `UpdatePodSandboxResources`, it would be surfaced in this metric as a high error rate through its `success=false` label. Because it returns early, the reported latency might actually be lower in this scenario.

  - Mitigations: Disable the feature gate or upgrade the container runtime to a
    compatible version (e.g., latest containerd/CRI-O).
  - Diagnostics: Kubelet logs (search for `UpdatePodSandboxResources` errors) and
    `kubectl get pod <name> -o yaml` to check Pod conditions (`PodResizePending`, `PodResizeInProgress`).
- **Cgroup update failure (OS level)**:

>   - Detection: Kubelet will emit an event indicating failure to update cgroups. The metric `kubelet_pod_in_progress_resizes` will fail to decrement for the target pod, potentially revealing a spike in actuation duration.

Reviewer 3: I think it still worth it to mention that this can be detected by increases in error cases from the `kubelet_pod_resize_duration_milliseconds` metric (label is `success` with value `false` in this case)

Reviewer 3: iirc we also emit an event when an in-progress resize errors out, which could be another way to detect this

## Future Work

**VPA Integration**

> SIG Autoscaling is actively working on Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) support for pod-level resources (see [design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nbUNuuW3YbKkea124nyBrUjw97TS3i1d019S8YxsFYA/edit?usp=sharing)). Since these changes are non-trivial, they will require significant time to reach completion. Integration with VPA is planned but is not a GA blocker for this KEP because:

Reviewer 5: I'd prefer if we linked to the AEP and not a google doc.

Reviewer 5: Would this be addressed before merging? 
We have an open AEP that can be linked to

- VPA is out-of-tree and has a separate release cycle from Kubernetes core.

> - VPA doesn’t break when pod-level resources are present. While it might invalidate a pod if container requests/limits conflict with pod-level rules, it does not prevent the core feature from functioning safely.

Reviewer 5: > VPA doesn’t break when pod-level resources are present

Has this been tested?

Author: Yes it has been tested, however if VPA results in aggregated container requests being greater than pod level requests, it results in validation failures. I can document that as well in this KEP

Author: Yes, but in case the container resizes by VPA result in container requests being greater than the pod-level request. This throws an error as the pod would be invalid.

## Future Work

**VPA Integration**

> SIG Autoscaling is actively working on Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) support for pod-level resources (see [design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nbUNuuW3YbKkea124nyBrUjw97TS3i1d019S8YxsFYA/edit?usp=sharing)). Since these changes are non-trivial, they will require significant time to reach completion. Integration with VPA is planned but is not a GA blocker for this KEP because:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
SIG Autoscaling is actively working on Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) support for pod-level resources (see [design doc](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/pull/8586)). Since these changes are non-trivial, they will require significant time to reach completion. Integration with VPA is planned but is not a GA blocker for this KEP because:
```
